---
title: "R-Workshops for Academics - 2026"
date: 2025-11-21
---

This course is designed to give VU FSW researchers all that is necessary to start using R in their everyday work.

Everyone is welcomed, from PhD students to professors. It does not matter if you are a qualitative researcher that has never used R, or a quantitative researcher that wants to learn new topics or move out of SPSS/STATA. 

**When:** From February 13th to June 19th, 2026, between 9:30 and 12:30 hrs.

**Where:**  In February and March HG-1G13. For April, May and June in HG-1G11. Online is also possible.

**Register:** First-come-first-served applies. We only have 15 places. We will notify you in January 13th whether you got a place in all the sessions you selected.
[https://forms.office.com/e/xBY9gP3upc](https://forms.office.com/e/xBY9gP3upc).


## Itinerary and locations
Please keep in mind that all the material builds on itself. If you are interested on a specific topic then you need to attend (know about) all the previous sessions:

1.	February 13th[HG-1G13]: Introduction to R, R-Studio, and data frames
2.	February 27th[HG-1G13]: Introduction to packages, Tidyverse, and R-Markdown
3.	March 13th[HG-1G13]: Introduction to data visualization using ggplot2
4.	March 27th[HG-1G13]: Introduction to unsupervised learning
5.	April 10th[HG-1G11]: Introduction to statistical analysis with base R
6.	April 24th[HG-1G11]: Introduction to supervised learning 
7.	May 8th[HG-1G11]: Introduction to text as data
8.	May 22nd[HG-1G11]: Introduction to text mining with tidytext
9.	June 5th[HG-1G11]: Introduction to machine learning for text with textrecipes
10.	June 19th[HG-1G11]: Introduction to basic programming with R

Depending on public holidays some dates may be moved.

## More information

You can find all the material here:
[https://github.com/SofiaG1l/R_Course](https://github.com/SofiaG1l/R_Course)